Investors have once again affirmed South Africa as an attractive investment destination, as they have committed to investing in the country’s economy at the fourth South Africa Investment Conference (SAIC). With the many companies that made new investment commitments at this year’s morning session of the conference, which is currently underway on Thursday, President Cyril Ramaphosa said they do so because they see opportunity in the country. “Despite the impact of the [COVID] pandemic, by the time of the third South Africa Investment Conference in 2020, we had raised a total of R774 billion in investment commitments,” President Ramaphosa said. Addressing the SAIC at the Sandton Convention Centre in Johannesburg, he said government is two-thirds of the way to reaching its target. The conference is part of government’s investment drive to attract R1.2 trillion over five years. “Of the R774 billion committed, around R316 billion has so far been invested. Of the 152 investment pledges, 45 projects have been completed. A further 57 are under construction. “Fifteen have been put on hold, in several cases due to the impact of the pandemic. The investments that have been realised since our first conference have created job opportunities, increased localisation and expanded local value chains,” the President said. The investments have brought skills, technology and know-how into the economy. “Whether it is a young person employed in a data centre, a worker at an auto plant, or a small business supplier to a renewable energy plant, these investments are changing people’s lives. “The chance to earn a decent livelihood is fundamental to the dignity and worth of every human being, and it is these investments that are making the difference,” the President said. At this year’s conference, many companies across various sectors came forward to make new investment commitments. South Africa attracted commitments across a wide range of economic sectors including energy; automotive; mining and mineral beneficiation; healthcare and pharmaceutical sector, as well as the creative and fashion industries. In addition, commitments were made in the development finance institutions sector; infrastructure, property and logistics sector, as well as the food and beverages industry. The first set of commitments from this year’s conference are: Investments in the energy sector:  Investments in the automotive industry:  Investments in the mining and mineral beneficiation:  Investments in the healthcare and pharmaceutical sector:  Investment in the creative industries and fashion:  Investments in infrastructure, property and logistics sector:  Investments in food and beverages industry:  Investment in the development finance institutions sector: -SAnews.gov.za