Minister in the Presidency, Mondli Gungubele, has on behalf of government extended condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of Silumko Sokupa, who passed away on Tuesday after a short illness. In a statement on Thursday, Gungubele said he mourned the loss of ‘Bra Soks’, as Sokupa was affectionately known. “He was a struggle veteran who devoted his life to the advancement of the South African democratic project. His contribution to building this nation is invaluable. We send our deepest condolences to the Sokupa family,” the Minister said. Sokupa, who is described as a veteran public servant and ambassador, served the State Security Agency in various capacities over his long illustrious career in service of the people of South Africa. He was the Deputy Director General of the South African Secret Service before being appointed Coordinator for the Intelligence Services located in the National Intelligence Coordinating Committee, which consisted of heads of the National Intelligence Agency, the Secret Service, the South African Police Service’s Crime Intelligence, Defence Intelligence, the Directors General in the Presidency and the Foreign Affairs Department. The Presidency said Sokupa brought to the position of Coordinator for Intelligence the critical skills acquired from his many years of experience in intelligence. This includes a two-year period of secondment to Correctional Services in 1999 to assist with strengthening that department, working as the NIA Eastern Cape manager following amalgamation, later supervising and managing three provinces, as well as extensive knowledge and experience in foreign intelligence while deployed at the Secret Service. In 2018, President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed Sokupa as a member of the High-Level Review Panel on the mandate, capacity and organisational integrity of the States Security Agency chaired by Dr Sydney Mafumadi. In 2021, President Ramaphosa appointed Sokupa as a member of the panel of experts chaired by Prof Sandy Africa probing the July 2021 unrest. The report was published in November 2021. - SAnews.gov.za