Limpopo Police Commissioner, Lieutenant General Thembi Hadebe, has welcomed the arrest of suspects implicated in the murder/revenge killing at the weekend at Rebone RDP Section, near Steilop in the Gilead policing area. In a statement, provincial spokesperson, Brigadier Motlafela Mojapelo, said police in Gilead were alerted to a mob justice incident at the said area and on their arrival at the scene, they found a middle aged woman lying in a yard, having been severely assaulted. “Police were further directed to another male victim, who was lying on the floor, unconscious, inside the house. The medical personnel were then summoned and certified both victims dead on the scene. The victims were identified as John Mojela (28) and Grace Mongatane (52),” Hadebe said. He said police opened two counts of murder and immediately commenced with preliminary investigations, which revealed that the 28-year-old male victim resided at the nearby village of Tauatswala. The victim, he said, had visited his girlfriend when they allegedly got into an altercation. “The mother apparently intervened and in the process, they both attacked the boyfriend and strangled him. “Subsequent to the murder, an angry mob gathered at the said house and started attacking both mother and daughter and also burnt the house. The girlfriend and her siblings managed to escape but her mother was dragged to the back of the house where she was assaulted with stones and various objects. The suspects then fled the scene,” said Mojapelo. A team comprising various police units from the Waterberg District was immediately assembled, and the suspects were arrested on the same day. “Police will continue to deal decisively with community members who resort to acts of vigilantism and taking the law into their own hands,” said Hadebe. The eight suspects, aged between 23 and 78, were arrested for the revenge murder of Grace Mongatan, while her daughter was arrested for the murder of John Mojela. The eight were today expected to appear in the Gilead periodical court on charges of murder and arson, respectively. The 23-year-old suspect, who was charged with the murder of her boyfriend, was to also appear in the same court. More arrests are expected and the Police are appealing to anyone with information to contact Sergeant Mammila Selolo on 072 444 0282 or the Crime Stop number 08600 10111 or the nearest police station. Police investigations continue. – SAnews.gov.za