President Cyril Ramaphosa will on Tuesday host the Head of Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, Chancellor Olaf Scholz, on an official visit at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. In a statement on Monday, The Presidency said that Chancellor Scholz is visiting South Africa at the invitation of President Ramaphosa and will be accompanied by senior officials and business executives. “The visit is of great importance due to the strategic nature of South Africa’s relationship with Germany. Germany is South Africa’s second largest trading partner and in tourism, the third largest single source of overseas arrivals. Germany is also a major investment source and development partner,” the Presidency said. President Ramaphosa and Chancellor Scholz are set to exchange views on a number of issues of bilateral and international concern, including ways to enhance cooperation in areas such as energy and climate change, trade and investment, and responses to COVID-19 and vaccine demand. They will also reflect on developments on the African continent and internationally, including the conflict in Ukraine and its impact on the international economy and food and energy security. “Germany also holds the G7 Presidency for 2022 and in this context the leaders will exchange views on Germany’s G7 priorities and how these could benefit emerging economies and the African continent in particular,” the Presidency said. The Presidency added that Trade and Investment are major components of bilateral relations. South Africa’s total trade with Germany is R266 billion and its exports, a big percentage of which consist of value-added products, account for R155 billion a year. About 600 German companies are represented in South Africa and are a source of investment, employment and skills development. Later in the day, President Ramaphosa will join Chancellor Scholz for the launch of a South African-German consortium that will advance technology research for the production of sustainable aviation fuels. – SAnews.gov.za 