Cabinet has commended and expressed its gratitude to all people and organisations involved in recovery and rebuilding efforts following the recent devastating floods in some parts of the country, especially in KwaZulu-Natal. Briefing the media on the outcomes of Cabinet meeting held on Wednesday, Minister in The Presidency, Mondli Gungubele, said Cabinet thanked all non-governmental organisations, including faith-based organisations, communities, business people and relief organisations that have provided food, clothes, blankets, dignity packs and school uniforms to vulnerable families to meet their basic needs. Gungubele said the National Disaster Management Centre continues to coordinate all spheres of government in its efforts to provide humanitarian relief to all affected households. “Sheltering services are being provided to over 7 000 people in the four worst affected districts in KwaZulu-Natal. Work has started on building temporary residences for affected families on state-owned land parcels that have been identified in KwaZulu-Natal for possible resettlement,” Gungubele said. Gungubele also affirmed government’s commitment to managing the flood relief funds prudently and transparently. “The Auditor-General of South Africa is providing an additional monitoring service and the reprioritisation of funds is in line with the government’s budgeting system.” Take precautionary measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 Turning to COVID-19, Gungubele urged all people in South Africa to take precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the virus, following the latest statistics, which showed a marked increase in the rate of infections and illnesses associated with the winter season in the country. The National Department of Health confirmed 5 284 new COVID-19 cases in the past 24 – 48 hours, bringing the total number of laboratory-confirmed cases to 3 941 045. “Cabinet reminded everyone to continue safeguarding ourselves and other people by washing or sanitising our hands regularly, wearing a mask when indoors, maintaining a safe social distance, opening windows for ventilation and vaccinating. “Vaccination remains the best defence against COVID-19 as it prevents severe illness, hospitalisation and even death. You do not need a home address to vaccinate. Any person, with or without an identity document, can get vaccinated for free at all public vaccination sites across the country,” the Minister said. – SAnews.gov.za