Government has announced multi-faceted interventions for the victims of the KwaZulu-Natal floods ranging from measures to alleviate the economic impact on road users to the rebuilding and rehabilitation of infrastructure. Addressing a media briefing on Friday in relation to the much-needed relief in the transport sector Minister of Transport, Fikile Mbalula, said government is working closely with communities to ensure speedy repairs to both the road and rail infrastructure in the shortest possible time is realised. “The quantum cost for the repairs and rehabilitation of the rail network affected by flood damage is estimated at R3.3 billion. The disaster compounded an already challenged rail network that had been hit hard by theft and vandalism of rail infrastructure,” the Minister said. He said the service recovery for commuter rail will be undertaken in phases due to the severity of the impact of the floods on the rail network. The first phase will focus on restoring safe train movement in areas where damage was limited. Government anticipates achieving recovery in the north between one to three months, particularly in areas where the damage is not as severe. Emergency procurement processes have been activated to introduce a diesel service by the end of May 2022 in the following corridors: The second phase of the recovery will focus on recovering damaged and destroyed infrastructure, which will take between three to six months from the date of the award of the contract in the following corridors: Repairs on national roads Repair and rehabilitation work on the N2 and N3 is already underway at a total cost of R542.5 million. This work will be funded from the South African National Roads Agency SOC Ltd (SANRAL) budget. The following sections of the national roads are therefore receiving priority: Funding repairs for provincial roads Funding to repair provincial roads will be allocated through the reprioritization of the Provincial Road Maintenance Grant to the tune of R3.1 billion. “The province had initially requested assistance to the tune of R5.1 billion. However, through the reprioritisation of the Provincial budget, the R2.6 billion will be funded by the Province,” the Minister said. The following are provincial roads and Municipal structures that have been identified for priority repairs and rehabilitation. SANRAL has been appointed as an Implementing Agent for this work. - SAnews.gov.za